Initialisation
==============

Before running Routinator for the first time, you must prepare the working
environment. You do this using the :subcmd:`init` subcommand. This will create
the directory for the :term:`Trust Anchor Locator (TAL)` files and copy the
desired TALs into it, and create the directory for the local RPKI cache.

If you have installed Routinator using a package from our software package
repository, the application is configured to run as a system service with the
user *routinator*. We have included an initialisation script named
:program:`routinator-init` and pre-installed a :doc:`configuration
file<configuration>` located in ``/etc/routinator/routinator.conf`` to make the
setup process easy for you. The configuration is meant to prepare Routinator for
production environments, explicitly setting the TAL and RPKI cache directories
and enabling the HTTP and RTR servers on localhost. 

The :program:`routinator-init` script invokes the :subcmd:`init` subcommand as
the user *routinator* and takes configuration file into consideration. All of
options for the :subcmd:`init` subcommand can be appended to the
:program:`routinator-init` script, which are described below. If you have built
Routinator using Cargo you also have to perform the initialisation steps, but in
this case you invoke the :subcmd:`init` subcommand directly.

.. Important:: There is a subtle difference in the initialisation commands 
               depending on how you installed Routinator.

               When installed using a package, you would for example enter:

               .. code-block:: text

                  routinator-init --list-tals

               When built using Cargo, you would use:

               .. code-block:: text

                  routinator init --list-tals

Trust Anchor Locators
---------------------

Trust Anchor Locators (TALs) provide hints for the trust anchor certificates to
be used both to discover and validate all RPKI content. There are five TALs, one
for each Regional Internet Registry (RIR). For production environments these are
the only five you will ever need to fetch and validate all available RPKI data.

Some RIRs and third parties also provide separate TALs for testing purposes,
allowing operators to gain experience with using RPKI in a safe environment.
Both the production and testbed TALs are bundled with Routinator and can be
installed with the :subcmd:`init` subcommand. 

To get an overview of all available TALs use the :option:`--list-tals` option:

.. code-block:: text

    routinator init --list-tals
    
This displays the following overview:
    
.. code-block:: text
    
     .---- --rir-tals
     |  .- --rir-test-tals
     V  V
     
     X      afrinic             AFRINIC production TAL
     X      apnic               APNIC production TAL
     X      arin                ARIN production TAL
     X      lacnic              LACNIC production TAL
     X      ripe                RIPE production TAL
        X   apnic-testbed       APNIC RPKI Testbed
        X   arin-ote            ARIN Operational Test and Evaluation Environment
        X   ripe-pilot          RIPE NCC RPKI Test Environment
            nlnetlabs-testbed   NLnet Labs RPKI Testbed

Preparing for Production Environments
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. Warning:: Using the TAL from ARIN requires you to read and accept their 
             `Relying Party Agreement
             <https://www.arin.net/resources/manage/rpki/tal/>`_ before you can
             use it. Running the :subcmd:`init` subcommand will provide you with
             instructions.

By default, the repository and TAL directory will be created under
:file:`$HOME/.rpki-cache`. You can change their location using the
:option:`--repository-dir` and :option:`--tal-dir` options, or by using a
:doc:`configuration file<configuration>`. 

In the most common scenario, you will want to install the TALs of the five RIRs.
To do this, run the following command:

.. code-block:: text

   routinator init --rir-tals
   
This will return the following message:
   
.. code-block:: text   
   
   Before we can install the ARIN TAL, you must have read
   and agree to the ARIN Relying Party Agreement (RPA).
   It is available at

   https://www.arin.net/resources/manage/rpki/rpa.pdf

   If you agree to the RPA, please run the command
   again with the --accept-arin-rpa option.

Running the :subcmd:`init` subcommand with the :option:`--accept-arin-rpa`
option added will create the repository and TAL directory and copy the five
Trust Anchor Locator files into it:

.. code-block:: bash

   routinator init --rir-tals --accept-arin-rpa

If you built Routinator using Cargo and set up a :doc:`configuration
file<configuration>` before initialisation, make sure to refer to it using the
:option:`--config` option, e.g.:

.. code-block:: bash

   routinator --config /home/routinator/routinator.conf init --rir-tals --accept-arin-rpa

If you decide you cannot agree to the ARIN RPA terms, you can use the
:option:`--skip-tal` option to exclude the TAL. If, at a later point, you wish
to include the ARIN TAL you can add it to your current installation using the
:option:`--force` option, to force the installation of all TALs.

Preparing for Test Environments
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

To install all of the TALs for the various test environments, you can use the
:option:`--rir-test-tals` option. However, in most cases you will want to
install a specific one, using the :option:`--tal` option. 

For example, to add the TAL for the `ARIN Operational Test and Evaluation
Environment <https://www.arin.net/reference/tools/testing/#rpki>`_ to an already
initialised Routinator, enter:

.. code-block:: bash

   routinator init --force --tal arin-ote

.. versionadded:: 0.9.0
   :option:`--list-tals`, :option:`--rir-tals`, :option:`--rir-test-tals`, 
   :option:`--tal` and :option:`--skip-tal`
.. deprecated:: 0.9.0
   ``--decline-arin-rpa``, use :option:`--skip-tal` instead

Verifying Initialisation
------------------------

You should verify if Routinator has been initialised correctly and your firewall
allows the required outbound connections on ports 443 and 873. From a cold
start, it will take ten to fifteen minutes to do the first validation run that
builds up the validated cache. Subsequent runs will be much faster, because only
the changes between the repositories and the validated cache need to be
processed.

If you have installed Routinator from a package and run it as a service, you can
check the status using:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo systemctl status routinator

And check the logs using:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo journalctl --unit=routinator

.. Important:: Because it is expected that the state of the entire RPKI is not 
               perfect as all times, you may see several warnings about objects
               that are either stale or failed cryptographic verification, or
               repositories that are temporarily unavailable. 

If you have installed and initialised Routinator manually it is recommended to
perform an initial test run. You can do this by having Routinator print a
validated ROA payload (VRP) list with the :subcmd:`vrps` subcommand, and using
:option:`-v` twice to increase the :doc:`log level<logging>` to *debug*:

.. code-block:: bash

   routinator -vv vrps

Now, you can see how Routinator connects to the RPKI trust anchors, downloads
the the contents of the repositories to your machine, verifies it and produces a
list of VRPs in the default CSV format to standard output. 

.. code-block:: text

    RRDP https://rrdp.ripe.net/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.ripe.net/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    Found valid trust anchor https://rpki.afrinic.net/repository/AfriNIC.cer. Processing.
    Found valid trust anchor https://rpki.apnic.net/repository/apnic-rpki-root-iana-origin.cer. Processing.
    RRDP https://rrdp.afrinic.net/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.afrinic.net/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    RRDP https://rrdp.apnic.net/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.apnic.net/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    RRDP https://rrdp.afrinic.net/notification.xml: snapshot update completed.
    Found valid trust anchor https://rrdp.arin.net/arin-rpki-ta.cer. Processing.
    RRDP https://rrdp.arin.net/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.arin.net/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    rsync://repository.lacnic.net/rpki/: successfully completed.
    Found valid trust anchor https://rrdp.lacnic.net/ta/rta-lacnic-rpki.cer. Processing.
    RRDP https://rrdp.lacnic.net/rrdp/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.lacnic.net/rrdp/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    RRDP https://rrdp.arin.net/notification.xml: snapshot update completed.
    RRDP https://rrdp.sub.apnic.net/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.sub.apnic.net/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    RRDP https://rrdp.ripe.net/notification.xml: snapshot update completed.
    RRDP https://rrdp.sub.apnic.net/notification.xml: snapshot update completed.
    RRDP https://rpki-repo.registro.br/rrdp/notification.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rpki-repo.registro.br/rrdp/notification.xml: updating from snapshot.
    RRDP https://rrdp.twnic.tw/rrdp/notify.xml: Tree has 0 entries.
    RRDP https://rrdp.twnic.tw/rrdp/notify.xml: updating from snapshot.
    ...
    ASN,IP Prefix,Max Length,Trust Anchor
    AS137884,103.116.116.0/23,23,apnic
    AS9003,91.151.112.0/20,20,ripe
    AS38553,120.72.19.0/24,24,apnic
    AS58045,37.209.242.0/24,24,ripe
    AS9583,202.177.175.0/24,24,apnic
    AS50629,2a0f:ba80::/29,29,ripe
    AS398085,2602:801:a008::/48,48,arin
    AS21050,83.96.22.0/24,24,ripe
    AS55577,183.82.223.0/24,24,apnic
    AS44444,157.167.73.0/24,24,ripe
    AS197695,194.67.97.0/24,24,ripe
    ...