RTR Service
===========

Routinator has a built-in server for the RPKI-to-Router (RTR) protocol, which
can be started with the :option:`--rtr` command line option or the
:term:`rtr-listen` option in the configuration file. 

Routinator supports RTR version 1 described in :RFC:`8210`, as well as the
older version from :RFC:`6810`. After the first validation run has completed,
routers with support for route origin validation (ROV) can connect to
Routinator to fetch the processed data. 

.. Tip:: If you would like to run the RTR server as a separate daemon, for
         example because you want to centralise validation and distribute
         processed data to various locations where routers can connect, then
         NLnet Labs provides :doc:`RTRTR<rtrtr:index>`.

In the examples throughout the documentation we use port 3323 for RTR
connections, but please note that this is not the :abbr:`IANA (Internet
Assigned Numbers Authority)`-assigned default port for the protocol, which
would be 323. But as this is a privileged port, you would need to be running
Routinator as *root* when otherwise there is no reason to do that. 

Secure Transports
-----------------

Although there is no mandatory-to-implement transport that provides
authentication and integrity protection, :rfc:`6810#section-7` defines a
number of secure transports for RPKI-RTR that can be used to secure
communications, including TLS, SSH, TCP MD5 and TCP-AO. 

Routinator has native support for TLS connections, and can be configured to
use `SSH Transport`_ with some additional tooling.

TLS Transport
"""""""""""""

It's possible to natively use RTR-over-TLS connections with Routinator. There
is an :abbr:`IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority)`-assigned default
port for *rpki-rtr-tls* as well, in this case 324.

Currently, very few routers have implemented support for TLS, but it may be
especially useful to use secure connections when deploying our RTR data proxy
:doc:`RTRTR <rtrtr:index>`, as data may be flowing across the public
Internet.

In this example we'll start Routinator's RTR server listening on the IP
addresses 192.0.2.13 and 2001:0DB8::13 and use port 3324 to make sure it's
not a priviledged port. 

First, indicate that you want a TLS connection with the :option:`--rtr-tls`
option. Then use the :option:`--rtr-tls-cert` option to specify the path to a
file containing the server certificates to be used. This file has to contain
one or more certificates encoded in PEM format. Lastly, use the
:option:`--rtr-tls-key` option to specify the path to a file containing the
private key to be used for RTR-over-TLS connections. The file has to contain
exactly one private key encoded in PEM format:

.. code-block:: text

   routinator server --rtr-tls 192.0.2.13:3324 \
                     --rtr-tls [2001:0DB8::13]:3324 \
                     --rtr-tls-cert "/path/to/rtr-tls.crt" \
                     --rtr-tls-key "/path/to/rtr-tls.key"

If you want to securely connect to Routinator with RTRTR using the
:ref:`RTR-TLS Unit<rtrtr:configuration:rtr unit>`, a certificate that is
trusted by the usual set of web trust anchors will work with no additional
configuration. In case you generated a self-signed certificate for
Routinator, make sure to copy the certificate to your machine running RTRTR
and refer to the path of the file in your unit using the ``cacerts``
configuration option. 

.. versionadded:: 0.11.0

SSH Transport
"""""""""""""

These instructions were contributed by `Wild Kat <https://github.com/wk>`_.

SSH transport for RPKI-RTR can be configured with the help of `netcat
<http://netcat.sourceforge.net/>`_ and `OpenSSH <https://www.openssh.com/>`_.

1. Begin by installing the :program:`openssh-server` and :program:`netcat` packages.

Make sure Routinator is running as an RTR server on localhost:

.. code-block:: text

   routinator server --rtr 127.0.0.1:3323

2. Create a username and a password for the router to log into the host with, such as ``rpki``.

3. Configure OpenSSH to expose an ``rpki-rtr`` subsystem that acts as a proxy into Routinator by editing the :file:`/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file or equivalent to include the following line:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Define an `rpki-rtr` subsystem which is actually `netcat` used to
   # proxy STDIN/STDOUT to a running `routinator server --rtr 127.0.0.1:3323`
   Subsystem       rpki-rtr        /bin/nc 127.0.0.1 3323

   # Certain routers may use old KEX algos and Ciphers which are no longer enabled by default.
   # These examples are required in IOS-XR 5.3 but no longer enabled by default in OpenSSH 7.3
   Ciphers +3des-cbc
   KexAlgorithms +diffie-hellman-group1-sha1
   
   # Only allow the rpki user to execute this one command
   Match User rpki
       ForceCommand /bin/nc localhost 3323
       PasswordAuthentication yes
   Match all

4. Restart the OpenSSH server daemon.

5. Set up the router running IOS-XR using this example configuration:

.. code-block:: text

   router bgp 65534
    rpki server 192.168.0.100
     username rpki
     password <password>
     transport ssh port 22
