.TH "routinator" "1" "June 3, 2021" "NLnet Labs" "routinator 0.9.0
.\"
.\" routinator.1 -- RPKI Relying Party software
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020, NLnet Labs.
.\"
.\" See LICENSE for the license.
.\"
.\"
.SH "NAME"
.B routinator
\- RPKI relying party software
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B routinator
[options]
.B init
.RB [ init-options ]
.PP
.B routinator
[options]
.B vrps
[vrps-options]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output-file ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR format ]
.PP
.B routinator
[options]
.B validate
[validate-options]
.RB [ \-a
.IR asn ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR prefix ]
.PP
.B routinator
[options]
.B server
[server-options]
.PP
.B routinator
[options]
.B update
[update-options]
.PP
.B routinator
.B man
.RB [ \-o
.IR file ]
.PP
.B routinator
.B -h
.PP
.B routinator
.B -V


.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Routinator
collects and processes Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) data. It
validates the Route Origin Attestations contained in the data and makes
them available to your BGP routing workflow.
.P
It can run in one-shot mode outputting a list of validated ROA
payloads in various formats, as a server for the RPKI-to-Router (RTR)
protocol that many routers implement to access the data, or via HTTP.
.P
These modes and additional operations can be chosen via commands. For
the available commands, see
.B COMMANDS
below.


.SH "OPTIONS"
.P
The available options are:

.TP
.BI \-c\  path \fR,\ \fB\-\-config= path
Provides the path to a file containing basic configuration. If this option
is not given, Routinator will try to use
.I $HOME/.routinator.conf
if that exists. If that doesn't exist, either, default values for the
options as described here are used.
.IP
See
.B CONFIGURATION FILE
below for more information on the format and contents of the configuration
file.

.TP
.BI \-b\  dir \fR,\ \fB\-\-base\-dir= dir
Specifies the base directory to keep status information in. Unless
overwritten by the
.B -r
or
.B -t
options, the local repository will be kept in the subdirectory
.I repository
and the TALs will be kept in the subdirectory
.I tals\fR.
.IP
If omitted, the base directory defaults to
.I $HOME/.rpki-cache\fR.

.TP
.BI \-r\  dir \fR,\ \fB\-\-repository\-dir= dir
Specifies the directory to keep the local repository in. This is the place
where Routinator stores the RPKI data it has collected and thus is a copy of
all the data referenced via the trust anchors.

.TP
.BI \-t\  dir \fR,\ \fB\-\-tal\-dir= dir
Specifies the directory containing the trust anchor locators (TALs) to use.
Trust anchor locators are the starting points for collecting and validating
RPKI data. See
.B TRUST ANCHOR LOCATORS
for more information on what should be present in this directory.

.TP
.BI \-x\  file \fR,\ \fB\-\-exceptions= file
Provides the path to a local exceptions file. The option can be used
multiple times to specify more than one file to use. Each file is a JSON
file as described in RFC 8416. It lists both route origins that should be
filtered out of the output as well as origins that should be added.

.TP
.BR \-\-strict
If this option is present, the repository will be validated in strict mode
following the requirements laid out by the standard documents very closely.
With the current RPKI repository, using this option will lead to a rather
large amount of invalid route origins and should therefore not be used in
practice.
.IP
See
.B RELAXED DECODING
below for more information.

.TP
.BI --stale= policy
This option defines how deal with stale objects. In RPKI, manifests and
CRLs can be stale if the time given in their
.I next-update
field is in the past, indicating that an update to the object was
scheduled but didn't happen. This can be because of an operational issue
at the issuer or an attacker trying to replay old objects.
.IP
There are three possible policies that define how Routinator should treat
stale objects.
.IP
A policy of
.I reject
instructs Routinator to consider all stale objects invalid. This will
result in all material published by the CA issuing this manifest and CRL
to be invalid including all material of any child CA. 
.IP
The
.I warn
policy will allow Routinator to consider any stale object to be valid. It
will, however, print a warning in the log allowing an operator to follow
up on the issue.
.IP
Finally, the
.I accept
policy will cause Routinator to quietly accept any stale object as valid.
.IP
In Routinator 0.8.0 and newer, 
.I reject
is the default policy if the option is not provided. In version 0.7.0 the
default for this option was 
.I warn.
In all previous versions
.I warn
was hard-wired.

.TP
.BI --unsafe-vrps= policy
This option defines how to deal with "unsafe VRPs." If the address prefix
of a VRP overlaps with any resources assigned to a CA that has been rejected
because if failed to validate completely, the VRP is said to be unsafe since
using it may lead to legitimate routes being flagged as RPKI invalid.
.IP
There are three options how to deal with unsafe VRPs:
.IP
A policy of
.I reject
will filter out these VRPs. Warnings will be logged to indicate which VRPs
have been filtered
.IP
The
.I warn
policy will log warnings for unsafe VRPs but will add them to the valid VRPs.
.IP
Finally, the
.I accept
policy will quietly add unsafe VRPs to the valid VRPs.
.IP
Currently, the default policy is
.I warn
in order to gain operational experience with the frequency and impact of
unsafe VRPs. This default may change in future version.
.IP
For more information on the process of validation implemented in Routinator,
see the section
.B VALIDATION
below.

.TP
.BI --unknown-objects= policy
Defines how to deal with unknown types of RPKI objects. Currently, only
certificates (.cer), CRLs (.crl), manifests (.mft), ROAs (.roa), and
Ghostbuster Records (.gbr) are allowed to appear in the RPKI repository.
.IP
There are, once more, three policies for dealing with an object of any
other type:
.IP
The
.I reject
policy will reject the object as well as the entire CA. Consequently, an
unknown object appearing in a CA will mark all other objects issued by the
CA as invalid as well.
.IP
The policy of
.I warn
will log a warning, ignore the object, and accept all known
objects issued by the CA.
.IP
The similar policy of
.I accept
will quietly ignore the object and accept all known objects issued by the CA.
.IP
The default policy if the option is missing is
.IR warn .
.IP
Note that even if unknown objects are accepted, they must appear in the
manifest and the hash over their content must match the one given in the
manifest. If the hash does not match, the CA and all its objects are still
rejected.

.TP
.B --allow-dubious-hosts
As a precaution, Routinator will reject rsync and HTTPS URIs from RPKI data
with dubious host names. In particular, it will reject the name
.IR localhost,
URIs that consist of IP addresses, and a host name that contains an
explicit port.
.IP
This option allows to disable this filtering.

.TP
.B --fresh
Delete and reinitialize the local data storage before starting. This option
should be used when Routinator fails after reporting corrupt data storage.

.TP
.B --disable-rsync
If this option is present, rsync is disabled and only RRDP will be used.

.TP
.BI \-\-rsync\-command= command
Provides the command to run for rsync. This is only the command itself.
If you need to provide options to rsync, use the
.B rsync\-args
configuration file setting instead.
.IP
If this option is not given, Routinator will simply run
.I rsync
and hope that it is in the path.

.TP
.BI \-\-rsync\-timeout= seconds
Sets the number of seconds an rsync command is allowed to run before it is
terminated early. This protects against hanging rsync commands that prevent
Routinator from continuing. The default is 300 seconds which should be long
enough except for very slow networks.

.TP
.B --disable-rrdp
If this option is present, RRDP is disabled and only rsync will be used.

.TP
.BI --rrdp-fallback-time= seconds
Sets the maximum time in seconds since a last successful update of an RRDP
repository before Routinator falls back to using rsync. The default is
3600 seconds. If the given value is smaller than twice the refresh time, it
is silently increased to that value.
.IP
The actual time is chosen at random between the refresh time and this value
in order to spread out load on the rsync server. 

.TP
.BI --rrdp-timeout= seconds
Sets the timeout in seconds for any RRDP-related network operation, i.e.,
connects, reads, and writes. If this option is omitted, the default timeout
of 30 seconds is used. Set the option to 0 to disable the timeout.

.TP
.BI --rrdp-connect-timeout= seconds
Sets the timeout in seconds for RRDP connect requests. If omitted, the general
timeout will be used.

.TP
.BI --rrdp-local-addr= addr
If present, sets the local address that the RRDP client should bind to when
doing outgoing requests.

.TP
.BI --rrdp-root-cert= path
This option provides a path to a file that contains a certificate in PEM
encoding that should be used as a trusted certificate for HTTPS server
authentication. The option can be given more than once.
.IP
Providing this option does
.I not
disable the set of regular HTTPS authentication trust certificates.

.TP
.BI --rrdp-proxy= uri
This option provides the URI of a proxy to use for all HTTP connections made
by the RRDP client. It can be either an HTTP or a SOCKS URI. The option can
be given multiple times in which case proxies are tried in the given order.

.TP
.BI --rrdp-keep-responses= path
If this option is enabled, the bodies of all HTTPS responses received from
RRDP servers will be stored under
.IR path .
The sub-path will be constructed using the components of the requested URI.
For the responses to the notification files, the timestamp is appended to
the path to make it possible to distinguish the series of requests made over
time.

.TP
.B --rrdp-disable-gzip
If this option is present, the gzip transfer encoding is disabled.

.TP
.BI --max-object-size= bytes
Limits the size of individual objects received via either rsync or RRDP to
the given number of bytes. The default value if this option is not present
is 20,000,000 (i.e., 20 MBytes). Use a value of 0 to disable the limit.

.TP
.B --dirty
If this option is present, unused files and directories will not be deleted
from the repository directory after each validation run.
.TP
.BI \-\-validation\-threads= count
Sets the number of threads to distribute work to for validation. Note that
the current processing model validates trust anchors all in one go, so you
are likely to see less than that number of threads used throughout the
validation run.
.TP
.BR \-v ,\  \fB\-\-verbose
Print more information. If given twice, even more information is printed.
.IP
More specifically, a single
.B -v
increases the log level from the default of
.I warn
to
.I info\fR,
specifying it more than once increases it to
.I debug\fR.
.IP
See
.B LOGGING
below for more information on what information is logged at the different
levels.
.TP
.BR \-q ,\  \fB\-\-quiet
Print less information. Given twice, print nothing at all.
.IP
A single
.B -q
will drop the log level to
.I error\fR.
Repeating
.B -q
more than once turns logging off completely.
.TP
.BR \-\-syslog
Redirect logging output to syslog.
.IP
This option is implied if a command is used that causes Routinator to run
in daemon mode.
.TP
.BI \-\-syslog-facility= facility
If logging to syslog is used, this option can be used to specify the syslog
facility to use. The default is
.I daemon\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-logfile= path
Redirect logging output to the given file.
.TP
.BR \-h , " \-\-help"
Print some help information.
.TP
.BR \-V , " \-\-version
Print version information.


.SH COMMANDS
Routinator provides a number of operations around the local RPKI repository.
These can be requested by providing different commands on the command line.

.SS init
Prepares the local repository directories and the TAL directory for running
Routinator. Specifically, makes sure the local repository directory exists,
and creates the TAL directory and fills it with the desired TALs.
.P
For more information about TALs, see
.B TRUST ANCHOR LOCATORS
below.
.TP
.BR -f ,\ \fB --force
Forces installation of the TALs even if the TAL directory already exists.
.TP
.B --rir-tals
Selects the production TALs of the five RIRs for installation. If no other
TAL selection options are provided, this option is assumed.
.TP
.B --rir-test-tals
Selects the bundled TALs for RIR testbeds for installation.
.TP
.BI --tal= name
Selects the bundled TAL with the provided name for installation.
.TP
.BI --skip-tal= name
Deselects the bundled TAL with the given name.
.TP
.BI --list-tals
List all bundled TALs and exit. The list also shows which TALs are selected
by the
.B --rir-tals
and
.B --rir-test-tals
options.
.TP
.B --accept-arin-rpa
Before you can use the ARIN TAL, you need to agree to the ARIN Relying Party
Agreement (RPA). You can find it at
.I https://www.arin.net/resources/manage/rpki/rpa.pdf
and explicitly agree to it via this option. This explicit agreement is
necessary in order to install the ARIN TAL.

.SS vrps
This command requests that Routinator update the local repository and then
validate the Route Origin Attestations in the repository and output the
valid route origins, which are also known as Validated ROA Payload or VRPs,
as a list.
.TP
.BI -o\  file \fR,\ \fB\-\-output= file
Specifies the output file to write the list to. If this option is missing
or file is
.I "-"
the list is printed to standard output.
.TP
.BI -f\  format \fR,\ \fB\-\-format= format
The output format to use. Routinator currently supports the following formats:
.RS
.TP
.B csv
The list is formatted as lines of comma-separated values of the autonomous
system number, the prefix in slash notation, the maximum prefix length, and
an abbreviation for the trust anchor the entry is derived from. The latter is
the name of the TAL file without the extension
.IR ".tal" .
This can be overwritten with the
.I tal-labels
config file option.
.IP
This is the default format used if the
.B -f
option is missing.

.TP
.B csvcompat
The same as
.I csv
except that all fields are embedded in double quotes and the autonomous system
number is given without the prefix
.IR AS .
This format is pretty much identical to the CSV produced by the RIPE NCC RPKI
Validator.

.TP
.B csvext
An extended version of
.I csv
each line contains these comma-separated values: the rsync URI of the ROA
the line is taken from (or "N/A" if it isn't from a ROA), the autonomous
system number, the prefix in slash notation, the maximum prefix length, the
not-before date and not-after date of the validity of the ROA.
.IP
This format was used in the RIPE NCC RPKI Validator version 1. That version
produces one file per trust anchor. This is not currently supported by
Routinator -- all entries will be in one single output file.

.TP
.B json
The list is placed into a JSON object with a single element
.I "roas"
which contains an array of objects with four elements each: The autonomous
system number of the network authorized to originate a prefix in
.IR "asn" ,
the prefix in slash notation in
.IR "prefix" ,
the maximum prefix length of the announced route in
.IR "maxLength" ,
and the trust anchor from which the authorization was derived in
.IR "ta" .
This format is identical to that produced by the RIPE NCC RPKI Validator
except for different naming of the trust anchor. Routinator uses the name
of the TAL file without the extension
.IR ".tal"
whereas the RIPE NCC Validator has a dedicated name for each.

.TP
.B jsonext
The list is placed into a JSON object with a single element
.I "roas"
which contains an array of objects with four elements each: The autonomous
system number of the network authorized to originate a prefix in
.IR "asn" ,
the prefix in slash notation in
.IR "prefix" ,
the maximum prefix length of the announced route in
.IR "maxLength" .
.IP
Extensive information about the source of the object is given the array
.IR "source".
Each item in that array is an object providing details of
a source of the VRP. The object will have a
.I "type"
of
.I "roa"
if it was derived from a valid ROA object or
.I "exception"
if it was an assertion in a local exception file.
.IP
For ROAs,
.I "uri"
provides the rsync URI of the ROA,
.I "validity"
provides the validity of the ROA itself, and
.I "chainValidity"
the validity considering the validity of the certificates along the validation
chain.
.IP
For assertions from local exceptions,
.I "path"
will provide the path of the local exceptions file and, optionally,
.I "comment"
will provide the comment if given for the assertion.
.IP
Please note that because of this additional information, output in
.B jsonext
format will be quite large.

.TP
.B openbgpd
Choosing this format causes Routinator to produce a
.I "roa-set"
configuration item for the OpenBGPD configuration.
.TP
.B bird1
Choosing this format causes Routinator to produce a
.I "roa table"
configuration item for the BIRD1 configuration.
.TP
.B bird2
Choosing this format causes Routinator to produce a
.I "route table"
configuration item for the BIRD2 configuration.
.TP
.B rpsl
This format produces a list of RPSL objects with the authorization in the
fields
.IR route ,
.IR origin ,
and
.IR source .
In addition, the fields
.IR descr ,
.IR mnt-by ,
.IR created ,
and
.IR last-modified ,
are present with more or less meaningful values.
.TP
.B summary
This format produces a summary of the content of the RPKI repository. For
each trust anchor, it will print the number of verified ROAs and VRPs. Note
that this format does not take filters into account. It will always provide
numbers for the complete repository.
.TP
.B none
This format produces no output whatsoever.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-n ,\  \-\-noupdate
The repository will not be updated before producing the list.
.TP
.B \-\-complete
If any of the rsync commands needed to update the repository failed, complete
the operation but provide exit status 2. If this option is not given, the
operation will complete with exit status 0 in this case.
.TP
.BI \-a \ asn\fR,\  \-\-select\-asn= asn
Only output VRPs for the given ASN. The option can be given multiple times,
in which case VRPs for all provided ASNs are provided. ASNs can be given with
or without the prefix
.IR AS .
.TP
.BI \-p \ prefix\fR,\  \-\-select\-prefix= prefix
Only output VRPs with an address prefix that covers the given prefix, i.e.,
whose prefix is equal to or less specific than the given prefix. This will
include VRPs regardless of their ASN and max length. In other words, the
output will include all VRPs that need to be considered when deciding whether
an announcement for the prefix is RPKI valid or invalid.
.IP
The option can be given multiple times, in which case VRPs for all prefixes
are provided. It can also be combined with one or more ASN selections. Then
all matching VRPs are included. That is, selectors combine as "or" not "and."

.SS validate
This command can be used to perform RPKI route origin validation for one or
more route announcements. Routinator will determine whether the provided
announcements are RPKI valid, invalid, or not found.

.PP
A single route announcement can be given directly on the command line:

.TP
.BI \-a \ asn\fR,\  \-\-asn= asn
The AS number of the autonomous system that originated the route
announcement. ASNs can be given with
or without the prefix
.IR AS .

.TP
.BI \-p \ prefix\fR,\  \-\-prefix= prefix
The address prefix the route announcement is for.

.TP
.BR \-j ,\  \-\-json
A detailed analysis on the reasoning behind the validation is printed in
JSON format including lists of the VRPs that caused the particular result.
If this option is omitted, Routinator will only print the determined
state.

.PP
Alternatively, a list of route announcements can be read from a file or
standard input.

.TP
.BI -i \ file\fR,\  --input= file
If present, input is read from the given file. If the file is given is a
single dash, input is read from standard input.

.TP
.BR \-j ,\  \-\-json
If this option is provided, the input is assumed to be JSON format. It should
consist of a single object with one member
.I  routes
which contains an array of objects. Each object describes one route
announcement through its
.I prefix
and
.I asn
members which contain a prefix and originating AS number as strings,
respectively.

.IP
If the option is not provided, the input is assumed to consist of simple
plain text with one route announcement per line, provided as a prefix followed
by an ASCII-art arrow
.I =>
surrounded by white space and followed by the AS number of originating
autonomous system.

.PP
The following additional options are available independently of the input
method.

.TP
.BI -o \ file\fR,\  --output= file
Output is written to the provided file. If the option is omitted or
.I file
is given as a single dash, output is written to standard output.


.TP
.BR \-n ,\  \-\-noupdate
The repository will not be updated before performing validation.
.TP
.B \-\-complete
If any of the rsync commands needed to update the repository failed, complete
the operation but provide exit status 2. If this option is not given, the
operation will complete with exit status 0 in this case.

.SS server
This command causes Routinator to act as a server for the RPKI-to-Router
(RTR) and HTTP protocols. In this mode, Routinator will read all the TALs
(See
.B TRUST ANCHOR LOCATORS
below) and will stay attached to the terminal unless the
.B -d
option is given.
.PP
The server will periodically update the local repository, every ten minutes
by default, notify any clients of changes, and let them fetch validated data.
It will not, however, reread the trust anchor locators. Thus, if you update
them, you will have to restart Routinator.
.PP
You can provide a number of addresses and ports to listen on for RTR and HTTP
through command line options or their configuration file equivalent.
Currently, Routinator will only start listening on these ports after an
initial validation run has finished.
.PP
It will not listen on any sockets unless explicitly specified. It
will still run and periodically update the repository. This might be useful
for use with
.B vrps
mode with the
.B -n
option.
.TP
.BR -d ,\ \fB --detach
If present, Routinator will detach from the terminal after a successful start.
.TP
.BI \-\-rtr=  addr:port
Specifies a local address and port to listen on for incoming RTR connections.
.IP
Routinator supports both protocol version 0 defined in RFC 6810 and version
1 defined in RFC 8210. However, it does not support router keys introduced
in version 1. IPv6 addresses must be enclosed in square brackets. You can
provide the option multiple times to let Routinator listen on multiple
address-port pairs.
.TP
.BI \-\-http= addr:port
Specifies the address and port to listen on for incoming HTTP connections.
See
.B HTTP SERVICE
below for more information on the HTTP service provided by Routinator.
.TP
.BI \-\-listen\-systemd
The RTR listening socket will be acquired from systemd via socket
activation. Use this option together with systemd's socket units to allow a
Routinator running as a regular user to bind to the default RTR port 323.
.IP
Currently, all TCP listener sockets handed over by systemd will be used for
the RTR protocol.
.TP
.BI \-\-rtr\-tcp\-keepalive= seconds
The number of seconds to wait before sending a TCP keepalive on an
established RTR connection. By default, TCP keepalive is enabled on all RTR
connections with an idle time of 60 seconds. Set this option to 0 to disable
keepalives.
.TP
.BI --rtr-client-metrics
If provided, the server metrics will include separate metrics for every RTR
client. Clients are identified by their RTR source IP address. This is
disabled by default to avoid accidentally leaking information about the
local network topology.
.TP
.BI \-\-refresh= seconds
The amount of seconds the server should wait after having finished updating
and validating the local repository before starting to update again. The
next update will start earlier if objects in the repository expire earlier.
The default value is 600 seconds.
.TP
.BI \-\-retry= seconds
The amount of seconds to suggest to an RTR client to wait before trying to
request data again if that failed. The default value is 600 seconds,
as recommended in RFC 8210.
.TP
.BI \-\-expire= seconds
The amount of seconds to an RTR client can keep using data if it cannot
refresh it. After that time, the client should discard the data. Note that
this value was introduced in version 1 of the RTR protocol and is thus not
relevant for clients that only implement version 0. The default value, as
recommended in RFC 8210, is 7200 seconds.
.TP
.BI \-\-history= count
In RTR, a client can request to only receive the changes that happened since
the last version of the data it had seen. This option sets how many change
sets the server will at most keep. If a client requests changes from an older
version, it will get the current full set.
.IP
Note that routers typically stay connected with their RTR server and therefore
really only ever need one single change set. Additionally, if RTR server or
router are restarted, they will have a new session with new change sets and
need to exchange a full data set, too. Thus, increasing the value probably
only ever increases memory consumption.
.IP
The default value is 10.
.TP
.BI \-\-pid\-file= path
States a file which will be used in server mode to store the processes PID.
While the process is running, it will keep the file locked.
.TP
.BI \-\-working\-dir= path
The working directory for server process. If provided, Routinator
will change to this directory.
.TP
.BI \-\-chroot= path
The root directory for server mode. If this option is provided, Routinator
will change its root directory to the given directory. This
will only work if all other paths provided via the configuration or command
line options are under this directory.
.TP
.BI --user= user-name
The name of the user to change to for server mode. It this option is
provided, Routinator will run as that user after the listening sockets for
HTTP and RTR have been created. This may cause problems, if the user is not
allowed to write to the directory given as repository directory or is not
allowed to read the TAL directory or local exception files.
.TP
.BI --group= group-name
The name of the group to change to for server mode. It this option is
provided, Routinator will run as that group after the listening sockets for
HTTP and RTR have been created.

.SS update
Updates the local repository by resyncing all known publication points. The
command will also validate the updated repository to discover any new
publication points that appear in the repository and fetch their data.
.PP
As such, the command really is a shortcut for running
.B routinator vrps -f none\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-complete
If any of the rsync commands needed to update the repository failed, complete
the operation but provide exit status 2. If this option is not given, the
operation will complete with exit status 0 in this case.

.SS dump
Writes the contents of all stored data to the file system. This is primarily
intended for debugging but can be used to get access to the view of the RPKI
data that Routinator currently sees.

.TP
.BI \-o \ dir\fR,\ \-\-output= dir
Write the output to the given directory. If the option is omitted, the current
directory is used.

.PP
Three directories will be created in the output directory:

.PP
The
.I rrdp
directory will contain all the files collected via RRDP from the various
repositories. Each repository is stored in its own directory. The mapping
between rpkiNotify URI and path is provided in the
.I repositories.json
file. For each repository, the files are stored in a directory structure
based on the components of the file’s rsync URI.

.PP
The
.I rsync
directory contains all the files collected via rsync. The files are stored
in a directory structure based on the components of the file’s rsync URI.

.PP
The
.I store
directory contains all the files used for validation. Files collected via
RRDP or rsync are copied to the store if they are correctly referenced by
a valid manifest. This part contains one directory for each RRDP repository
similarly structured to the
.I rrdp
directory and one additional directory
.I rsync
that contains files collected via rsync.

.SS man
Displays the manual page, i.e., this page.
.TP
.BI -o\  file \fR,\ \fB\-\-output= file
If this option is provided, the manual page will be written to the given
file instead of displaying it. Use
.I "-"
to output the manual page to standard output.


.SH TRUST ANCHOR LOCATORS
RPKI uses trust anchor locators, or TALs, to identify the location and
public keys of the trusted root CA certificates. Routinator keeps these
TALs in files in the TAL directory which can be set by the
.B \-t
option. If the
.B \-b
option is used instead, the TAL directory will be in the subdirectory
.I tals
under the directory specified in this option. The default location, if
no options are used at all is
.I $HOME/.rpki-cache/tals\fR.
.P
Routinator comes with a set of commonly used TALs that can be used to
populate the TAL directory via the
.B init
command. By default, the command will install the TALs of the five Regional
Internet Registries (RIRs) necessary for the complete global RPKI repository.
.P
If the directory does exist, Routinator will use all files with an extension
of
.I .tal
in this directory. This means that you can add and remove trust anchors by
adding and removing files in this directory. If you add files, make sure they
are in the format described by RFC 7730 or RFC 8630.

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
Instead of providing all options on the command line, they can also be
provided through a configuration file. Such a file can be selected through
the
.B -c
option. If no configuration file is specified this way but a file named
.I $HOME/.routinator.conf
is present, this file is used.
.PP
The configuration file is a file in TOML format. In short, it consists of
a sequence of key-value pairs, each on its own line. Strings are to be
enclosed in double quotes. Lists can be given by enclosing a comma-separated
list of values in square brackets.
.PP
The configuration file can contain the following entries. All path values
are interpreted relative to the directory the configuration file is located.
in. All values can be overwritten via the command line options.
.TP
.B repository-dir
A string containing the path to the directory to store the local repository
in. This entry is mandatory.
.TP
.B tal-dir
A string containing the path to the directory that contains the Trust Anchor
Locators. This entry is mandatory.
.TP
.B exceptions
A string or a list of strings, each containing the path to a file with local
exceptions. If missing, no local exception files are used.
.TP
.B strict
A boolean specifying whether strict validation should be employed. If missing,
strict validation will not be used.

.TP
.B stale
A string specifying the policy for dealing with stale objects.
.RS
.TP
.I reject
Consider all stale objects invalid rendering all material published by the CA
issuing the stale object to be invalid including all material of any child CA.
This is the default policy if the value is missing.
.TP
.I warn
Consider stale objects to be valid but print a warning to the log.
.TP
.I accept
Quietly consider stale objects valid.
.RE

.TP
.B unsafe-vrps
A string specifying the policy for dealing with unsafe VRPs.
.RS
.TP
.I reject
Filter unsafe VRPs and add warning messages to the log.
.TP
.I warn
Warn about unsafe VRPs in the log but add them to the final set of VRPs.
This is the default policy if the value is missing.
.TP
.I accept
Quietly add unsafe VRPs to the final set of VRPs.
.RE

.TP
.B unknown-objects
A string specifying the policy for dealing with unknown RPKI object types.
.RS
.TP
.I reject
Reject the object and its issuing CA.
.TP
.I warn
Warn about the object but ignore it and accept the issuing CA.
This is the default policy if the value is missing.
.TP
.I accept
Quietly ignore the object and accept the issuing CA.
.RE

.TP
.B allow-dubious-hosts
A boolean value that, if present and true, disables Routinator's filtering of
dubious host names in rsync and HTTPS URIs from RPKI data.

.TP
.B disable-rsync
A boolean value that, if present and true, turns off the use of rsync.

.TP
.B rsync-command
A string specifying the command to use for running rsync. The default is
simply
.IR rsync .
.TP
.B rsync-args
A list of strings containing the arguments to be passed to the rsync command.
Each string is an argument of its own.
.IP
If this
option is not provided, Routinator will try to find out if your rsync
understands the
.B \-\-contimeout
option and, if so, will set it to 10 thus letting connection attempts time
out after ten seconds. If your rsync is too old to support this option, no
arguments are used.
.TP
.B rsync-timeout
An integer value specifying the number of seconds an rsync command is allowed to
run before it is being terminated. The default if the value is missing is
300 seconds.

.TP
.B disable-rrdp
A boolean value that, if present and true, turns off the use of RRDP.

.TP
.BI rrdp-fallback-time
An integer value specifying the maximum number of seconds since a last
successful update of an RRDP repository before Routinator falls back to
using rsync. The default in case the value is missing is 3600 seconds. If
the value provided is smaller than twice the refresh time, it is silently
increased to that value.

.TP
.B rrdp-timeout
An integer value that provides a timeout in seconds for all individual
RRDP-related network operations, i.e., connects, reads, and writes. If the
value is missing, a default timeout of 30 seconds will be used. Set the value
to 0 to turn the timeout off.

.TP
.B rrdp-connect-timeout
An integer value that, if present, sets a separate timeout in seconds for
RRDP connect requests only.

.TP
.B rrdp-local-addr
A string value that provides the local address to be used by RRDP connections.

.TP
.B rrdp-root-certs
A list of strings each providing a path to a file containing a trust anchor
certificate for HTTPS authentication of RRDP connections. In addition to the
certificates provided via this option, the system's own trust store is used.

.TP
.B rrdp-proxies
A list of string each providing the URI for a proxy for outgoing RRDP
connections. The proxies are tried in order for each request. HTTP and SOCKS5
proxies are supported.

.TP
.B rrdp-keep-responses
A string containing a path to a directory into which the bodies of all HTTPS
responses received from RRDP servers will be saved.
The sub-path will be constructed using the components of the requested URI.
For the responses to the notification files, the timestamp is appended to
the path to make it possible to distinguish the series of requests made over
time.

.TP
.B rrdp-disable-gzip
A boolean value that determines whether the gzip transfer encoding should be
disabled in RRDP requests. If the option is missing, gzip will be used.

.TP
.B max-object-size
An integer value that provides a limit for the size of individual objects
received via either rsync or RRDP to the given number of bytes. The default
value if this option is not present is 20,000,000 (i.e., 20 MBytes). A value
of 0 disables the limit.

.TP
.B dirty
A boolean value which, if true, specifies that unused files and directories
should not be deleted from the repository directory after each validation run.
If left out, its value will be false and unused files will be deleted.
.TP
.B validation-threads
An integer value specifying the number of threads to be used during
validation of the repository. If this value is missing, the number of CPUs
in the system is used.
.TP
.B log-level
A string value specifying the maximum log level for which log messages should
be emitted. The default is
.IR warn .
.IP
See
.B LOGGING
below for more information on what information is logged at the different
levels.
.TP
.B log
A string specifying where to send log messages to. This can be one of the
following values:
.RS
.TP
.I default
Log messages will be sent to standard error if Routinator stays attached to
the terminal or to syslog if it runs in daemon mode.
.TP
.I stderr
Log messages will be sent to standard error.
.TP
.I syslog
Log messages will be sent to syslog.
.TP
.I file
Log messages will be sent to the file specified through the
.B log-file
configuration file entry.
.RE
.IP
The default if this value is missing is, unsurprisingly,
.IR default .
.TP
.B log-file
A string value containing the path to a file to which log messages will be
appended if the
.B log
configuration value is set to
.IR file .
In this case, the value is mandatory.
.TP
.B syslog-facility
A string value specifying the syslog facility to use for logging to syslog.
The default value if this entry is missing is
.IR daemon .
.TP
.B rtr-listen
An array of string values each providing the address and port which the RTR
daemon should listen on in TCP mode. Address and port should be separated by
a colon. IPv6 address should be enclosed in square brackets.
.TP
.B http-listen
An array of string values each providing the address and port which the HTTP
service should listen on. Address and port should be separated by
a colon. IPv6 address should be enclosed in square brackets.
.TP
.B listen-systemd
The RTR TCP listening socket will be acquired from systemd via socket
activation. Use this option together with systemd's socket units to allow a
Routinator running as a regular user to bind to the default RTR port 323.
.TP
.B rtr-tcp-keepalive
An integer value specifying the number of seconds to wait before sending a
TCP keepalive on an established RTR connection. If this option is missing,
TCP keepalive will be enabled on all RTR connections with an idle time of 60
seconds. If this option is present and set to zero, TCP keepalives are
disabled.
.TP
.BI rtr-client-metrics
A boolean value specifying whether server metrics should include separate
metrics for every RTR client. If the value is missing, no RTR client
metrics will be provided.
.TP
.B refresh
An integer value specifying the number of seconds Routinator should wait
between consecutive validation runs in server mode. The next validation run
will happen earlier, if objects expire earlier. The default is 600 seconds.
.TP
.B retry
An integer value specifying the number of seconds an RTR client is requested
to wait after it failed to receive a data set. The default is 600 seconds.
.TP
.B expire
An integer value specifying the number of seconds an RTR client is requested
to use a data set if it cannot get an update before throwing it away and
continuing with no data at all. The default is 7200 seconds.
if it cannot get an update before throwing it away and
continuing with no data at all. The default is 7200 seconds.
.TP
.B history-size
An integer value specifying how many change sets Routinator should keep in
RTR server mode. The default is 10.
.TP
.B pid-file
A string value containing a path pointing to the PID file to be used in
server mode.
.TP
.B working-dir
A string value containing a path to the working directory for server mode.
.TP
.B chroot
A string value containing the path Routinator should use as its root
directory in server mode.
.TP
.B user
A string value containing the name of the user to change to in server mode.

.TP
.B group
A string value containing the name of the group to change to in server mode.

.TP
.B tal-label
An array containing arrays of two string values mapping the name of a TAL
file (without the path but including the extension) as given by the first
string to the name of the TAL to be included where the TAL is referenced in
output as given by the second string.

If the option is missing or if a TAL isn't mentioned in the option,
Routinator will construct a name for the TAL by using its file name (without
the path) and dropping the extension.


.SH HTTP SERVICE
Routinator can provide an HTTP service allowing to fetch the Validated ROA
Payload in various formats. The service does not support HTTPS and should
only be used within the local network.
.P
The service only supports GET requests with the following
paths:

.TP
.B /metrics
Returns a set of monitoring metrics in the format used by Prometheus.
.TP
.B /status
Returns the current status of the Routinator instance. This is similar to
the output of the
.B /metrics
endpoint but in a more human friendly format.
.TP
.B /api/v1/status
Returns the current status in JSON format.
.TP
.B /log
Returns the logging output of the last validation run. The log level matches
that set upon start.
.IP
Note that the output is collected after each validation run and is therefore
only available after the initial run has concluded.
.TP
.B /version
Returns the version of the Routinator instance.
.TP
.B /api/v1/validity/\fIas-number\fB/\fIprefix
Returns a JSON object describing whether the route announcement given by
its origin AS number and address prefix is RPKI valid, invalid, or not found.
The returned object is compatible with that provided by the RIPE NCC RPKI
Validator. For more information, see
.I https://www.ripe.net/support/documentation/developer-documentation/rpki-validator-api

.TP
.B /validity?asn=\fIas-number\fB&prefix=\fIprefix
Same as above but with a more form-friendly calling convention.

.TP
.BR /json-delta ,\  /json-delta?session\fIsession\fB?serial=\fIserial
Returns a JSON object with the changes since the dataset version identified
by the
.I session
and
.I serial
query parameters. If a delta cannot be produced from that version, the full
data set is returned and the member
.I reset
in the object will be set to
.IR true .
In either case, the members
.I session
and
.I serial
identify the version of the data set returned and their values should be
passed as the query parameters in a future request.
.IP
The members
.I announced
and
.I withdrawn
contain arrays with route origins that have been announced and withdrawn,
respectively, since the provided session and serial. If
.I reset
is
.IR true ,
the
.I withdrawn
member is not present.

.P
In addition, the current set of VRPs is available for each output format
at a path with the same name as the output format. E.g., the CSV output is
available at
.BR /csv .
.P
These paths accept selector expressions to
limit the VRPs returned in the form of a query string. The field
.B select-asn
can be used to select ASNs and the field
.B select-prefix
can be used to select prefixes. The fields can be repeated multiple
times.
.P
This works in the same way as the options of the same name to the
.B vrps
command.

.SH LOGGING
In order to allow diagnosis of the VRP data set as well as its overall health,
Routinator logs an extensive amount of information. The log levels used by
syslog are utilized to allow filtering this information for particular use
cases.
.P
The log levels represent the following information:
.TP
.I error
Information related to events that prevent Routinator from continuing to
operate at all as well as all issues related to local configuration even
if Routinator will continue to run.
.TP
.I warn
Information about events and data that influences the set of VRPs produced
by Routinator. This includes failures to communicate with repository servers,
or encountering invalid objects.
.TP
.I info
Information about events and data that could be considered abnormal but do
not influence the set of VRPs produced. For example, when filtering of unsafe
VRPs is disabled, the unsafe VRPs are logged with this level.
.TP
.I debug
Information about the internal state of Routinator that may be useful for,
well, debugging.

.SH VALIDATION
In
.B vrps
and
.B server
mode, Routinator will produce a set of VRPs from the data published in the
RPKI repository. It will walk over all certification authorities (CAs)
starting with those referred to in the configured TALs.
.P
Each CA is checked whether all its published objects are present, correctly
encoded, and have been signed by the CA. If any of the objects fail this
check, the entire CA will be rejected. If an object of an unknown type is
encountered, the behaviour depends on the
.B unknown-objects
policy. If this policy has a value of
.I reject
the entire CA will be rejected. In this case, only certificates (.cer), CRLs
(.crl), manifestes (.mft), ROAs (.roa), and Ghostbuster records (.gbr) will
be accepted.
.P
If a CA is rejected, none of its ROAs will
be added to the VRP set but also none of its child CAs will be considered
at all; their published data will not be fetched or validated.
.P
If a prefix has its ROAs published by different CAs, this will lead to some
of its VRPs being dropped while others are still added. If the VRP for the
legitimately announced route is among those having been dropped, the route
becomes RPKI invalid. This can happen both by operator error or through an
active attack.
.P
In addition, if a VRP for a less specific prefix exists that covers the
prefix of the dropped VRP, the route will be invalidated by the less specific
VRP.
.P
Because of this risk of accidentally or maliciously invalidating routes,
VRPs that have address prefixes overlapping with resources of rejected CAs
are called
.I unsafe VRPs.
.P
In order to avoid these situations and instead fall back to an RPKI unknown
state for such routes, Routinator allows to filter out these unsafe VRPs.
This can be enabled via the
.BI --unsafe-vrps= reject
command line option or setting
.BI unsafe-vrps= "reject"
in the config file.
.P
By default, this filter is currently disabled but warnings are logged about
unsafe VRPs. This allows to assess the operation impact of such a filter.
Depending on this assessment, the default may change in future version.
.P
One exception from this rule are CAs that have the full address space
assigned, i.e., 0.0.0.0/0 and ::/0. Adding these to the filter would wipe out
all VRPs. These prefixes are used by the RIR trust anchors to avoid having to
update these often. However, each RIR has its own address space so losing all
VRPs should something happen to a trust anchor is unnecessary.

.SH RELAXED DECODING
The documents defining RPKI include a number of very strict rules
regarding the formatting of the objects published in the RPKI repository.
However, because RPKI reuses existing technology, real-world applications
produce objects that do not follow these strict requirements.
.PP
As a consequence, a significant portion of the RPKI repository is actually
invalid if the rules are followed. We therefore introduce two decoding
modes: strict and relaxed. Strict mode rejects any object that does not
pass all checks laid out by the relevant RFCs. Relaxed mode ignores a
number of these checks.
.PP
Note that none of the violations accepted in relaxed mode endanger the
integrity or security of the objects. All signatures are always validated
as strictly as necessary.
.PP
This section documents the violations we encountered and are dealing with in
relaxed decoding mode.

.SS Resource Certificates (RFC 6487)

Resource certificates are defined as a profile on the more general
Internet PKI certificates defined in RFC 5280.

.TP
.B Subject and Issuer
The RFC restricts the type used for CommonName attributes to
PrintableString, allowing only a subset of ASCII characters, while RFC
5280 allows a number of additional string types. At least one CA produces
resource certificates with Utf8Strings.
.IP
In relaxed mode, we will only check that the general structure of the
issuer and subject fields are correct and allow any number and types of
attributes. This seems justified since RPKI explicitly does not use these
fields.

.SS Signed Objects (RFC 6488)
Signed objects are defined as a profile on CMS messages defined in RFC
5652.
.TP
.B DER Encoding
RFC 6488 demands all signed objects to be DER encoded while the more
general CMS format allows any BER encoding -- DER is a stricter subset of
the more general BER. At least one CA does indeed produce BER encoded
signed objects.
.IP
In relaxed mode, we will allow BER encoding.
.IP
Note that this isn't just nitpicking. In BER encoding, octet strings can
be broken up into a sequence of substrings. Since those strings are in
some places used to carry encoded content themselves, such an encoding
does make parsing significantly more difficult. At least one CA does
produce such broken up strings.

.SH SIGNALS
.SS SIGUSR1: Reload TALs and restart validation
When receiving SIGUSR1, Routinator will attempt to reload the TALs and, if
that succeeds, restart validation. If loading the TALs fails, Routinator will
exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Upon success, the exit status 0 is returned. If any fatal error happens,
the exit status will be 1. Some commands provide a
.B --complete
option which will cause the exit status to be 2 if any of the rsync commands
to update the repository fail.

.SH AUTHOR
.P
Jaap Akkerhuis wrote the original version of this manual page,
Martin Hoffmann extended it for later versions.

.SH BUGS
Sure.

